ExternalMu Shuffle (#65)
lamps-wg/dilithium-certificates: draft-ietf-lamps-dilithium-certificates.md

defined in {{ML-DSA-PubblicKey}} is intentionally encoded as a
single OCTET STRING.

## Rationale for disallowing HashML-DSA {#sec-disallow-hash}

> The HashML-DSA mode defined in {{Section 5.4 of FIPS204}} MUST NOT be

Author: ```suggestion
The HashML-DSA mode defined in Section 5.4 of {{FIPS204}} MUST NOT be
```

used by CAs generating certificates or CRLs, CAs and RAs enrolling
Subcribers, OCSP responders responding; in other words, public keys
identified by `id-hash-ml-dsa-44-with-sha512`,
`id-hash-ml-dsa-65-with-sha512`, and `id-hash-ml-dsa-87-with-sha512`
MUST NOT be used in X.509 certificates and CRLs and related PKIX
protocols. The notable exception is the public key in end-entity
X.509 certificates; such public keys could be used beyond PKIX.

This restriction is for both security and implementation reasons.

The security reason for disallowing HashML-DSA is that the design of the
ML-DSA algorithm provides enhanced resistance against signature
collision attacks, compared with conventional RSA or ECDSA signature
algorithms. Specifically, ML-DSA binds the hash of the public key `tr`
to the message to-be-signed prior to hashing, as described in line 6 of
Algorithm 7 of {{FIPS204}}. In practice, this provides binding to the
indended verification public key, preventing some attacks that would
otherwise allow a signature to be successfully verified against a
non-intended public key. Also, this binding means that in the case of

> the discovery of a collision attack against SHA-3, an attacker would

Reviewer: "unlikely discovery of a collision attack ..."

> non-intended public key. Also, this binding means that in the case of
> the discovery of a collision attack against SHA-3, an attacker would

Author: ```suggestion
non-intended public key. Also, this binding means that in the unlikely
discovery of a collision attack against SHA-3, an attacker would
```

have to perform a public-key-specific collision search in order to find

> message pairs such that `H(tr || m1) = H(tr || m2)` since a simple hash

Reviewer: Remove "simple". Finding a collision on a good hash functions should not be considered simple.

Reviewer 2: I didn't mean "simple" in the sense of "easy", but rather in the sense that it's not domain-separated by the public key.

Maybe "... since a direct hash collision `H(m1) = H(m2)` will not suffice." captures the idea better?

collision `H(m1) = H(m2)` will not suffice. HashML-DSA removes both of
these enhanced security properties and therefore is a weaker signature

> algorithm.

Reviewer: Remove "therefore is a weaker signature algorithm." In practice it is not weaker because SHA-3 does not have collisions. Better to not be too alarmist.

Reviewer 2: Is there a less alarmist wording that still captures the same idea?

Maybe "... and therefore weakens some of the security properties built in to the ML-DSA design" ?

Reviewer: I am proposing the below rephrase 

> [...] Also, this binding means that in the **unlikely, theoretical** case of a collision attack against SHA-3, an attacker would have to perform a public-key-specific collision search in order to find message pairs such that H(tr || m1) = H(tr || m2) since a simple hash collision H(m1) = H(m2) will not suffice. HashML-DSA removes both of these enhanced security properties. ~~and therefore is a weaker signature algorithm.~~

Reviewer 3: I think the length and order of paragraphs gives undue emphasis to the security aspect. I don't mind mentioning the difference, but it should be toned down.

> The implentation reason for disallowing HashML-DSA stems from the fact

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The implementation reason for disallowing HashML-DSA stems from the fact
```

typo

that ML-DSA and HashML-DSA are incompatible algorithms that require
different `Verify()` routines. This forwards to the protocol the
complexity of informing the client whether to use `ML-DSA.Verify()` or

> `HashML-DSA.Verify()`, which itself introduces some risk of
> cross-protocol forgery attacks in some contexts. Additionally, since

Author: ```suggestion
`HashML-DSA.Verify()`. Additionally, since
```

> cross-protocol forgery attacks in some contexts. Additionally, since

Reviewer: "cross-protocol forgery attacks in some contexts"? 
The OID and the ctx in M' are preventing those. I suggest  to remove 
" which itself introduces some risk of cross-protocol forgery attacks in some contexts"

Reviewer 2: Agreed. The 0x00 | 0x01 domain separator in M' does a good job of preventing attacks here.

collision `H(m1) = H(m2)` will not suffice. HashML-DSA removes both of
these enhanced security properties.

The implementation reason for disallowing HashML-DSA stems from the fact
that ML-DSA and HashML-DSA are incompatible algorithms that require
different `Verify()` routines. This forwards to the protocol the
complexity of informing the client whether to use `ML-DSA.Verify()` or
`HashML-DSA.Verify()` along with the hash algorithm to use. Additionally, since
the same OIDs are used to identify the ML-DSA
public keys and ML-DSA signature algorithms, an implementation would
need to commit a given public key to be either of type `ML-DSA` or
`HashML-DSA` at the time of certificate creation. This is anticipated
to cause operational issues in contexts where the operator does not
know at key generation time whether the key will need to produce pure
or pre-hashed signatures. ExternalMu-ML-DSA avoids all of these
operational concerns by virtue of having keys and signatures that are
indistinguishable from ML-DSA (i.e., ML-DSA and ExternalMu-ML-DSA are
mathematically equivalent algorithms). The difference between ML-DSA
and ExternalMu-ML-DSA is merely an internal implementation detail of

> the signer and has no impact on the verifier or network protocol.

Reviewer 3: Perf.

defined in {{ML-DSA-PubblicKey}} is intentionally encoded as a
single OCTET STRING.

## Rationale for disallowing HashML-DSA {#sec-disallow-hash}

> The HashML-DSA mode defined in Section 5.4 of {{FIPS204}} MUST NOT be
> used by CAs generating certificates or CRLs, CAs and RAs enrolling
> Subcribers, OCSP responders responding; in other words, public keys
> identified by `id-hash-ml-dsa-44-with-sha512`,
> `id-hash-ml-dsa-65-with-sha512`, and `id-hash-ml-dsa-87-with-sha512`
> MUST NOT be used in X.509 certificates and CRLs and related PKIX
> protocols. The notable exception is the public key in end-entity
> X.509 certificates; such public keys could be used beyond PKIX.

Author: ```suggestion
The HashML-DSA mode defined in Section 5.4 of {{FIPS204}} MUST NOT be
used; in other words, public keys identified by
`id-hash-ml-dsa-44-with-sha512`, `id-hash-ml-dsa-65-with-sha512`, and
`id-hash-ml-dsa-87-with-sha512` MUST NOT be in X.509 certificates used for
CRLs, OCSP, certificate issuance and related PKIX protocols (e.g. TLS). The
notable exception is the public key in end-entity X.509 certificates; such
public keys MAY used beyond PKIX.
```

Reviewer: Look good.

Reviewer 3: This is good.

This restriction is for both security and implementation reasons.

The security reason for disallowing HashML-DSA is that the design of the
ML-DSA algorithm provides enhanced resistance against signature
collision attacks, compared with conventional RSA or ECDSA signature
algorithms. Specifically, ML-DSA binds the hash of the public key `tr`
to the message to-be-signed prior to hashing, as described in line 6 of
Algorithm 7 of {{FIPS204}}. In practice, this provides binding to the
indended verification public key, preventing some attacks that would
otherwise allow a signature to be successfully verified against a

> non-intended public key. Also, this binding means that in the unlikely
> discovery of a collision attack against SHA-3, an attacker would
> have to perform a public-key-specific collision search in order to find
> message pairs such that `H(tr || m1) = H(tr || m2)` since a direct hash
> collision `H(m1) = H(m2)` will not suffice. HashML-DSA removes both of
> these enhanced security properties and therefore is a weaker signature
> algorithm.

Author: ```suggestion
non-intended public key. Also, this unlikely, theoretical binding means that in the unlikely
discovery of a collision attack against SHA-3, an attacker would
have to perform a public-key-specific collision search in order to find
message pairs such that `H(tr || m1) = H(tr || m2)` since a direct hash
collision `H(m1) = H(m2)` will not suffice. HashML-DSA removes both of
these enhanced security properties.
```

Reviewer: Sorry, more rephrase 

> Also, this binding means that in the unlikely, theoretical discovery of a collision attack against SHA-3

The implementation reason for disallowing HashML-DSA stems from the fact
that ML-DSA and HashML-DSA are incompatible algorithms that require
different `Verify()` routines. This forwards to the protocol the
complexity of informing the client whether to use `ML-DSA.Verify()` or

> `HashML-DSA.Verify()`. Additionally, since

Author: ```suggestion
`HashML-DSA.Verify()` along with the hash algorithm to use. Additionally, since
```

Reviewer: Look good

ExternalMu-ML-DSA.Sign_internal(sk, mu, rnd): # mu is passed as argument instead of M'
   ... identical to FIPS 204 Algorithm 7, but with Line 6 removed.
~~~
{: #fig-externalmu-ml-dsa-internal title="Internal steps of ExternalMu-ML-DSA"}

ExternalMu-ML-DSA requires the public key, or its prehash, as input to
the pre-digesting function. This assumes the signer generating the
pre-hash is in possession of the public key before signing and is
different from conventional pre-hashing which only requires the
message and the hash function as input.

Security-wise, during the signing operation of pure (or "one-step")
ML-DSA, the cryptographic module extracts the public key hash `tr` from
the secret key object, and thus there is no possibility of mismatch
between `tr` and `sk`. In ExternalMu-ML-DSA, the public key or its hash
needs to be provided to the `Prehash()` routine indpedendly of the secret
key, and while the exact mechanism by which it is delivered will be
implementation-specific, it does open a windown for mismatches between
`tr` and `sk`. First, this will produce a signature which will fail to
verify under the intended public key since a compliant `Verify()` routine

> will independently compute `tr` from the public key. Second, a malicious
> or tricked signer could potentially produce a signature which validates
> under a different public key, which weakens the implicit security
> assumptions of the ML-DSA algorithm. Implementors should pay careful

Author: ```suggestion
will independently compute `tr` from the public key. Implementors should pay careful
```

inconsistently-sized payloads. Pre-hashing can be performed at the
protocol layer, but not all protocols support it. Examples in
{{RFC5280}} are certificates and CRLs; these do not include message
digesting before signing. This can make signing large CRLs or a high
volume of certificates with large public keys challenging.

As mentioned in the introduction, pure ML-DSA signing itself
supports a pre-hashing flow by splitting the operation over two
modules. In this section, we make this "ExternalMu-ML-DSA"
more explicit.

There are two steps. First an `ExternalMu-ML-DSA.Prehash()`
followed by `ExternalMu-ML-DSA.Sign()`. Together these are functionally
equivalent to `ML-DSA.Sign()` from {{FIPS204}} in that used in sequence
they create exactly the same signatures as regular pure ML-DSA, which
can be verified by the unmodified `ML-DSA.Verify()`.

An ML-DSA key and certificate can be used with either ML-DSA
or ExternalMu-ML-DSA interchangeably.
Note that ExternalMu-ML-DSA describes a different signature API from ML-DSA
and therefore might require explicit support from hardware or
software cryptographic modules.

Note that the signing mode defined here is different from HashML-DSA

> defined in {{Section 5.4 of FIPS204}}. This specification uses exclusively

Author: ```suggestion
defined in Section 5.4 of {{FIPS204}}. This specification uses exclusively
```

ExternalMu-ML-DSA requires the public key, or its prehash, as input to
the pre-digesting function. This assumes the signer generating the
pre-hash is in possession of the public key before signing and is
different from conventional pre-hashing which only requires the
message and the hash function as input.

Security-wise, during the signing operation of pure (or "one-step")
ML-DSA, the cryptographic module extracts the public key hash `tr` from
the secret key object, and thus there is no possibility of mismatch
between `tr` and `sk`. In ExternalMu-ML-DSA, the public key or its hash
needs to be provided to the `Prehash()` routine indpedendly of the secret
key, and while the exact mechanism by which it is delivered will be
implementation-specific, it does open a windown for mismatches between
`tr` and `sk`. First, this will produce a signature which will fail to
verify under the intended public key since a compliant `Verify()` routine
will independently compute `tr` from the public key. Second, a malicious
or tricked signer could potentially produce a signature which validates
under a different public key, which weakens the implicit security

> assumptions of the ML-DSA algorithm. Implementors should pay careful

Reviewer: Remove 
> Second, a malicious or tricked signer could potentially produce a signature which validates under a different public key, which weakens the implicit security assumptions of the ML-DSA algorithm.

Alarmist. You can fool the signer that generates tr to use a different public key, but then you would also need to fool the rest f the signing to use a different private key. It means you control the whole signature generation which means you can do anything. 

The next sentence is fine though. tr should be generated with a public key we can trust regardless of how it is to exploit it.

Reviewer 2: I think there's something useful to be said about allowing `tr` to be manipulated outside the crypto module that holds the private key, but I don't feel strongly enough about it to keep it in. Feel free to remove.

attention to how the public key or its hash is delivered to the
`ExternalMu-ML-DSA.Prehash()` routine, and from where they are sourcing

> this data. Note that HashML-DSA also weakens this security assumption even

Reviewer: Remove the mention to HashML-DSA, it is covered already in the Security Considerations.
